src/content/markdown/aerospike_5_kubernetes.md, before:

# Blog 5: Kubernetes Aerospike - StatefulSet Deep Dive

*Master Kubernetes-native Aerospike with advanced orchestration patterns for modern infrastructure*

---

## Introduction

Kubernetes has become the de facto standard for container orchestration, and running stateful databases like Aerospike in Kubernetes requires understanding StatefulSets, persistent volumes, and HMA configuration. This guide covers everything from basic StatefulSet deployments to advanced configurations.

For technical managers, this guide helps you understand when Kubernetes makes sense for Aerospike, what operational overhead to expect, and how to evaluate deployment options.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to Aerospike on Kubernetes using StatefulSets
- **When to use:** When you're already using Kubernetes and need cloud-native Aerospike
- **Reading time:** 12-15 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 4-8 hours for production setup
- **Key takeaway:** StatefulSets provide basic functionality for Aerospike—choose based on your team's Kubernetes expertise and requirements
- **Skip if:** You're not using Kubernetes or prefer managed services for simplicity

**What You'll Master:**
- StatefulSet patterns with persistent storage
- HMA configuration in Kubernetes
- Pod disruption budgets and rolling updates
- High availability with clustering
- Backup and restore automation

---

## Kubernetes Deployment Strategy Overview

> 💡 **Need Aerospike architecture details?** Explore our [Aerospike Overview & Architecture Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/aerospike/README.md#overview--architecture) for component explanations and Hybrid Memory Architecture details.

### Kubernetes StatefulSets for Aerospike

| Strategy | Complexity | Control | Maintenance | Best For |
|----------|------------|---------|-------------|----------|
| **StatefulSets** | Medium | High | Medium | Teams wanting full control |

**Decision Framework:**
- **StatefulSets:** Maximum control, manual HA setup
- **Choose based on:** Team expertise, HA requirements, operational preferences

---

## Strategy: Kubernetes StatefulSets

### Why StatefulSets?

StatefulSets are the Kubernetes workload API object used to manage stateful applications. They provide:
- Stable network identities
- Ordered deployment and scaling
- Stable persistent storage
- Ordered, graceful deployment and scaling

### Basic StatefulSet Configuration

**aerospike-statefulset.yaml:**
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: StatefulSet
metadata:
  name: aerospike
spec:
  serviceName: aerospike
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: aerospike
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: aerospike
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: aerospike
        image: aerospike/aerospike-server:7.0
        ports:
        - containerPort: 3000
          name: service
        - containerPort: 3001
          name: fabric
        - containerPort: 3002
          name: mesh
        - containerPort: 3003
          name: info
        volumeMounts:
        - name: aerospike-data
          mountPath: /opt/aerospike/data
        - name: aerospike-config
          mountPath: /etc/aerospike
  volumeClaimTemplates:
  - metadata:
      name: aerospike-data
    spec:
      accessModes: [ "ReadWriteOnce" ]
      storageClassName: fast-ssd
      resources:
        requests:
          storage: 200Gi
```

---

## When to Choose Kubernetes for Aerospike

**Best For:**
- Already using Kubernetes for other services
- Need cloud-native deployment patterns
- Want infrastructure as code
- Have Kubernetes expertise

**Considerations:**
- Medium-High operational overhead
- Requires Kubernetes and Aerospike expertise
- HMA configuration more complex in containers

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Performance Tuning?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-performance-optimization-hma-clustering)
- **Want Local Development?** → Read [Blog 6: Local Development](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-local-development-docker-native-quick-start)
- **Still Deciding?** → Read [Blog 8: Decision Matrix](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-deployment-decision-matrix-complete-comparison-guide)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [Aerospike Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/aerospike/README.md).

---

*This is Blog 5 of the Aerospike Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*

Commit message:

Enhance blog posts with fact-checking and verification sections
- Added fact-checking and verification sections to multiple blog posts across the Aerospike, MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Redis series, ensuring that readers have access to accurate pricing estimates, technical specifications, and best practices.
- Included links to official documentation and resources for each technology to facilitate further research and verification of information.
- Updated pricing disclaimers to reflect approximate costs based on publicly available data as of 2025, emphasizing the importance of verifying current pricing with official sources.

src/content/markdown/aerospike_5_kubernetes.md, after:

# Blog 5: Kubernetes Aerospike - StatefulSet Deep Dive

*Master Kubernetes-native Aerospike with advanced orchestration patterns for modern infrastructure*

---

## Introduction

Kubernetes has become the de facto standard for container orchestration, and running stateful databases like Aerospike in Kubernetes requires understanding StatefulSets, persistent volumes, and HMA configuration. This guide covers everything from basic StatefulSet deployments to advanced configurations.

For technical managers, this guide helps you understand when Kubernetes makes sense for Aerospike, what operational overhead to expect, and how to evaluate deployment options.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to Aerospike on Kubernetes using StatefulSets
- **When to use:** When you're already using Kubernetes and need cloud-native Aerospike
- **Reading time:** 12-15 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 4-8 hours for production setup
- **Key takeaway:** StatefulSets provide basic functionality for Aerospike—choose based on your team's Kubernetes expertise and requirements
- **Skip if:** You're not using Kubernetes or prefer managed services for simplicity

**What You'll Master:**
- StatefulSet patterns with persistent storage
- HMA configuration in Kubernetes
- Pod disruption budgets and rolling updates
- High availability with clustering
- Backup and restore automation

---

## Kubernetes Deployment Strategy Overview

> 💡 **Need Aerospike architecture details?** Explore our [Aerospike Overview & Architecture Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/aerospike/README.md#overview--architecture) for component explanations and Hybrid Memory Architecture details.

### Kubernetes StatefulSets for Aerospike

| Strategy | Complexity | Control | Maintenance | Best For |
|----------|------------|---------|-------------|----------|
| **StatefulSets** | Medium | High | Medium | Teams wanting full control |

**Decision Framework:**
- **StatefulSets:** Maximum control, manual HA setup
- **Choose based on:** Team expertise, HA requirements, operational preferences

---

## Strategy: Kubernetes StatefulSets

### Why StatefulSets?

StatefulSets are the Kubernetes workload API object used to manage stateful applications. They provide:
- Stable network identities
- Ordered deployment and scaling
- Stable persistent storage
- Ordered, graceful deployment and scaling

### Basic StatefulSet Configuration

**aerospike-statefulset.yaml:**
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: StatefulSet
metadata:
  name: aerospike
spec:
  serviceName: aerospike
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: aerospike
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: aerospike
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: aerospike
        image: aerospike/aerospike-server:7.0
        ports:
        - containerPort: 3000
          name: service
        - containerPort: 3001
          name: fabric
        - containerPort: 3002
          name: mesh
        - containerPort: 3003
          name: info
        volumeMounts:
        - name: aerospike-data
          mountPath: /opt/aerospike/data
        - name: aerospike-config
          mountPath: /etc/aerospike
  volumeClaimTemplates:
  - metadata:
      name: aerospike-data
    spec:
      accessModes: [ "ReadWriteOnce" ]
      storageClassName: fast-ssd
      resources:
        requests:
          storage: 200Gi
```

---

## When to Choose Kubernetes for Aerospike

**Best For:**
- Already using Kubernetes for other services
- Need cloud-native deployment patterns
- Want infrastructure as code
- Have Kubernetes expertise

**Considerations:**
- Medium-High operational overhead
- Requires Kubernetes and Aerospike expertise
- HMA configuration more complex in containers

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Performance Tuning?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-performance-optimization-hma-clustering)
- **Want Local Development?** → Read [Blog 6: Local Development](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-local-development-docker-native-quick-start)
- **Still Deciding?** → Read [Blog 8: Decision Matrix](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-deployment-decision-matrix-complete-comparison-guide)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [Aerospike Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/aerospike/README.md).

---

**Fact-Checking & Verification:** This blog post contains Kubernetes configurations, operator information, and best practices based on publicly available documentation and industry research. Kubernetes manifests and operator capabilities may vary by version and provider. For the most current and accurate information, please consult:
- [Aerospike Official Documentation](https://docs.aerospike.com/)
- [Kubernetes Official Documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/)
- [Aerospike Kubernetes Operator](https://github.com/aerospike/aerospike-kubernetes-operator)

---

*This is Blog 5 of the Aerospike Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*
