src/content/markdown/aerospike_4_docker.md, before:

# Blog 4: Docker Aerospike - Container Deployment Strategies

*Deploy production-ready Aerospike using Docker with focus on consistency and operational simplicity*

---

## Introduction

Docker has revolutionized database deployment, providing consistency across environments and simplifying operations. However, running Aerospike in containers for production requires careful consideration of data persistence, networking, security, and resource management, especially for HMA.

This comprehensive guide covers production-ready Aerospike containerization strategies, from basic Docker Compose setups to advanced multi-node configurations. You'll learn how to evaluate Docker for Aerospike, deploy securely, and operate containerized databases that meet production requirements.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to Aerospike containerization with Docker
- **When to use:** When you want consistent deployments across environments or container-first infrastructure
- **Reading time:** 10-12 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 2-4 hours for production setup
- **Key takeaway:** Docker simplifies deployment but requires careful attention to data persistence, networking, and HMA configuration
- **Skip if:** You prefer native installations or need maximum performance

**What You'll Master:**
- Docker Compose production configurations with security
- Container resource management and HMA optimization
- Persistent volume strategies and backup automation
- Multi-node cluster setup with Docker
- Security best practices for containerized databases

---

## Docker Basics for Aerospike

> 💡 **Learning Aerospike basics?** Check out our [Aerospike Overview & Architecture Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/aerospike/README.md#overview--architecture) for comprehensive cluster setup and Hybrid Memory Architecture guidance.

### Official Aerospike Docker Image

The official Aerospike Docker image is maintained by Aerospike Inc. and provides official Aerospike server images for all supported versions.

**Pull Official Image:**
```bash
# Pull latest Aerospike 7
docker pull aerospike/aerospike-server:7.0

# Pull specific version
docker pull aerospike/aerospike-server:7.0.0
```

### Basic Container Run

**Simple Container:**
```bash
docker run --name aerospike-container \
    -p 3000:3000 \
    -p 3001:3001 \
    -p 3002:3002 \
    -p 3003:3003 \
    -d aerospike/aerospike-server:7.0
```

---

## Docker Compose Production Setup

### Basic Production Configuration

**docker-compose.yml:**
```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  aerospike:
    image: aerospike/aerospike-server:7.0
    container_name: aerospike-production
    restart: unless-stopped
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"  # Service port
      - "3001:3001"  # Fabric port
      - "3002:3002"  # Mesh port
      - "3003:3003"  # Info port
    volumes:
      - aerospike_data:/opt/aerospike/data
      - aerospike_config:/etc/aerospike
    networks:
      - aerospike_network
    command: asd --config-file /etc/aerospike/aerospike.conf
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "asadm", "-e", "info"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  aerospike_data:
    driver: local
  aerospike_config:
    driver: local

networks:
  aerospike_network:
    driver: bridge
```

---

## When to Use Docker for Aerospike

### Choose Docker When:

1. **Consistency:** Need identical environments across dev/staging/prod
2. **Container-First:** Already using containers for other services
3. **Rapid Deployment:** Need quick setup and teardown
4. **Development:** Local development with production parity
5. **CI/CD:** Automated testing and deployment pipelines

### Avoid Docker When:

1. **Maximum Performance:** Need bare metal performance
2. **Simple Setup:** Single server, no containerization needs
3. **Legacy Systems:** Existing infrastructure doesn't support containers
4. **HMA Optimization:** Need fine-grained HMA tuning

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Orchestration?** → Read [Blog 5: Kubernetes Aerospike](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-kubernetes-statefulset-deep-dive)
- **Want Local Development?** → Read [Blog 6: Local Development](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-local-development-docker-native-quick-start)
- **Need Performance Tuning?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-performance-optimization-hma-clustering)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [Aerospike Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/aerospike/README.md).

---

*This is Blog 4 of the Aerospike Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*

Commit message:

Enhance blog posts with fact-checking and verification sections
- Added fact-checking and verification sections to multiple blog posts across the Aerospike, MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Redis series, ensuring that readers have access to accurate pricing estimates, technical specifications, and best practices.
- Included links to official documentation and resources for each technology to facilitate further research and verification of information.
- Updated pricing disclaimers to reflect approximate costs based on publicly available data as of 2025, emphasizing the importance of verifying current pricing with official sources.

src/content/markdown/aerospike_4_docker.md, after:

# Blog 4: Docker Aerospike - Container Deployment Strategies

*Deploy production-ready Aerospike using Docker with focus on consistency and operational simplicity*

---

## Introduction

Docker has revolutionized database deployment, providing consistency across environments and simplifying operations. However, running Aerospike in containers for production requires careful consideration of data persistence, networking, security, and resource management, especially for HMA.

This comprehensive guide covers production-ready Aerospike containerization strategies, from basic Docker Compose setups to advanced multi-node configurations. You'll learn how to evaluate Docker for Aerospike, deploy securely, and operate containerized databases that meet production requirements.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to Aerospike containerization with Docker
- **When to use:** When you want consistent deployments across environments or container-first infrastructure
- **Reading time:** 10-12 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 2-4 hours for production setup
- **Key takeaway:** Docker simplifies deployment but requires careful attention to data persistence, networking, and HMA configuration
- **Skip if:** You prefer native installations or need maximum performance

**What You'll Master:**
- Docker Compose production configurations with security
- Container resource management and HMA optimization
- Persistent volume strategies and backup automation
- Multi-node cluster setup with Docker
- Security best practices for containerized databases

---

## Docker Basics for Aerospike

> 💡 **Learning Aerospike basics?** Check out our [Aerospike Overview & Architecture Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/aerospike/README.md#overview--architecture) for comprehensive cluster setup and Hybrid Memory Architecture guidance.

### Official Aerospike Docker Image

The official Aerospike Docker image is maintained by Aerospike Inc. and provides official Aerospike server images for all supported versions.

**Pull Official Image:**
```bash
# Pull latest Aerospike 7
docker pull aerospike/aerospike-server:7.0

# Pull specific version
docker pull aerospike/aerospike-server:7.0.0
```

### Basic Container Run

**Simple Container:**
```bash
docker run --name aerospike-container \
    -p 3000:3000 \
    -p 3001:3001 \
    -p 3002:3002 \
    -p 3003:3003 \
    -d aerospike/aerospike-server:7.0
```

---

## Docker Compose Production Setup

### Basic Production Configuration

**docker-compose.yml:**
```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  aerospike:
    image: aerospike/aerospike-server:7.0
    container_name: aerospike-production
    restart: unless-stopped
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"  # Service port
      - "3001:3001"  # Fabric port
      - "3002:3002"  # Mesh port
      - "3003:3003"  # Info port
    volumes:
      - aerospike_data:/opt/aerospike/data
      - aerospike_config:/etc/aerospike
    networks:
      - aerospike_network
    command: asd --config-file /etc/aerospike/aerospike.conf
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "asadm", "-e", "info"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  aerospike_data:
    driver: local
  aerospike_config:
    driver: local

networks:
  aerospike_network:
    driver: bridge
```

---

## When to Use Docker for Aerospike

### Choose Docker When:

1. **Consistency:** Need identical environments across dev/staging/prod
2. **Container-First:** Already using containers for other services
3. **Rapid Deployment:** Need quick setup and teardown
4. **Development:** Local development with production parity
5. **CI/CD:** Automated testing and deployment pipelines

### Avoid Docker When:

1. **Maximum Performance:** Need bare metal performance
2. **Simple Setup:** Single server, no containerization needs
3. **Legacy Systems:** Existing infrastructure doesn't support containers
4. **HMA Optimization:** Need fine-grained HMA tuning

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Orchestration?** → Read [Blog 5: Kubernetes Aerospike](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-kubernetes-statefulset-deep-dive)
- **Want Local Development?** → Read [Blog 6: Local Development](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-local-development-docker-native-quick-start)
- **Need Performance Tuning?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-performance-optimization-hma-clustering)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [Aerospike Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/aerospike/README.md).

---

**Fact-Checking & Verification:** This blog post contains technical specifications, Docker configurations, and best practices based on publicly available documentation and industry research. Docker commands and configurations may vary by version and environment. For the most current and accurate information, please consult:
- [Aerospike Official Documentation](https://docs.aerospike.com/)
- [Docker Official Documentation](https://docs.docker.com/)
- [Aerospike Docker Images](https://hub.docker.com/r/aerospike/aerospike-server)

---

*This is Blog 4 of the Aerospike Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/aerospike-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*
