src/content/markdown/mongodb_4_docker.md, before:

# Blog 4: Docker MongoDB - Container Deployment Strategies

*Deploy production-ready MongoDB using Docker with focus on consistency and operational simplicity*

---

## Introduction

Docker has revolutionized database deployment, providing consistency across environments and simplifying operations. However, running MongoDB in containers for production requires careful consideration of data persistence, networking, security, and resource management.

This comprehensive guide covers production-ready MongoDB containerization strategies, from basic Docker Compose setups to advanced multi-node configurations. You'll learn how to evaluate Docker for MongoDB, deploy securely, and operate containerized databases that meet production requirements.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to MongoDB containerization with Docker
- **When to use:** When you want consistent deployments across environments or container-first infrastructure
- **Reading time:** 10-12 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 2-4 hours for production setup
- **Key takeaway:** Docker simplifies deployment but requires careful attention to data persistence, networking, and security
- **Skip if:** You prefer native installations or managed services

**What You'll Master:**
- Docker Compose production configurations with security
- Container resource management and performance optimization
- Persistent volume strategies and backup automation
- Multi-node replica set setup with Docker
- Security best practices for containerized databases
- Development-to-production parity strategies

---

## Docker Basics for MongoDB

> 💡 **Learning MongoDB basics?** Check out our [MongoDB Overview & Architecture Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/mongodb/README.md#overview--architecture) for comprehensive cluster setup and configuration guidance.

### Official MongoDB Docker Image

The official MongoDB Docker image is maintained by MongoDB Inc. and provides official MongoDB server images for all supported versions.

**Pull Official Image:**
```bash
# Pull latest MongoDB 7.0
docker pull mongo:7.0

# Pull specific version
docker pull mongo:7.0.5

# List available tags
docker search mongo
```

### Basic Container Run

**Simple Container:**
```bash
docker run --name mongo-container \
    -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=admin \
    -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=securepassword \
    -p 27017:27017 \
    -d mongo:7.0
```

---

## Docker Compose Production Setup

### Basic Production Configuration

**docker-compose.yml:**
```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  mongodb:
    image: mongo:7.0
    container_name: mongodb-production
    restart: unless-stopped
    environment:
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME: ${MONGO_ROOT_USERNAME}
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD: ${MONGO_ROOT_PASSWORD}
    ports:
      - "27017:27017"
    volumes:
      - mongodb_data:/data/db
      - mongodb_config:/data/configdb
    networks:
      - mongodb_network
    command: mongod --wiredTigerCacheSizeGB 2
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "mongosh", "--eval", "db.adminCommand('ping')"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  mongodb_data:
    driver: local
  mongodb_config:
    driver: local

networks:
  mongodb_network:
    driver: bridge
```

---

## Multi-Node Replica Set Setup

### Docker Compose with Replication

**docker-compose.replica.yml:**
```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  mongodb-primary:
    image: mongo:7.0
    container_name: mongodb-primary
    environment:
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME: admin
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD: securepassword
    command: mongod --replSet rs0 --bind_ip_all
    networks:
      - mongodb_network

  mongodb-secondary-1:
    image: mongo:7.0
    container_name: mongodb-secondary-1
    command: mongod --replSet rs0 --bind_ip_all
    networks:
      - mongodb_network

  mongodb-secondary-2:
    image: mongo:7.0
    container_name: mongodb-secondary-2
    command: mongod --replSet rs0 --bind_ip_all
    networks:
      - mongodb_network

networks:
  mongodb_network:
    driver: bridge
```

---

## When to Use Docker for MongoDB

### Choose Docker When:

1. **Consistency:** Need identical environments across dev/staging/prod
2. **Container-First:** Already using containers for other services
3. **Rapid Deployment:** Need quick setup and teardown
4. **Development:** Local development with production parity
5. **CI/CD:** Automated testing and deployment pipelines

### Avoid Docker When:

1. **Maximum Performance:** Need bare metal performance
2. **Simple Setup:** Single server, no containerization needs
3. **Legacy Systems:** Existing infrastructure doesn't support containers
4. **Compliance:** Specific compliance requirements not met by containers

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Orchestration?** → Read [Blog 5: Kubernetes MongoDB](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/mongodb-kubernetes-statefulset-operator-deep-dive)
- **Want Local Development?** → Read [Blog 6: Local Development](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/mongodb-local-development-docker-native-quick-start)
- **Need Performance Tuning?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/mongodb-performance-optimization-query-tuning-indexing)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [MongoDB Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/mongodb/README.md).

---

*This is Blog 4 of the MongoDB Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/mongodb-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*

Commit message:

Enhance blog posts with fact-checking and verification sections
- Added fact-checking and verification sections to multiple blog posts across the Aerospike, MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Redis series, ensuring that readers have access to accurate pricing estimates, technical specifications, and best practices.
- Included links to official documentation and resources for each technology to facilitate further research and verification of information.
- Updated pricing disclaimers to reflect approximate costs based on publicly available data as of 2025, emphasizing the importance of verifying current pricing with official sources.

src/content/markdown/mongodb_4_docker.md, after:

# Blog 4: Docker MongoDB - Container Deployment Strategies

*Deploy production-ready MongoDB using Docker with focus on consistency and operational simplicity*

---

## Introduction

Docker has revolutionized database deployment, providing consistency across environments and simplifying operations. However, running MongoDB in containers for production requires careful consideration of data persistence, networking, security, and resource management.

This comprehensive guide covers production-ready MongoDB containerization strategies, from basic Docker Compose setups to advanced multi-node configurations. You'll learn how to evaluate Docker for MongoDB, deploy securely, and operate containerized databases that meet production requirements.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to MongoDB containerization with Docker
- **When to use:** When you want consistent deployments across environments or container-first infrastructure
- **Reading time:** 10-12 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 2-4 hours for production setup
- **Key takeaway:** Docker simplifies deployment but requires careful attention to data persistence, networking, and security
- **Skip if:** You prefer native installations or managed services

**What You'll Master:**
- Docker Compose production configurations with security
- Container resource management and performance optimization
- Persistent volume strategies and backup automation
- Multi-node replica set setup with Docker
- Security best practices for containerized databases
- Development-to-production parity strategies

---

## Docker Basics for MongoDB

> 💡 **Learning MongoDB basics?** Check out our [MongoDB Overview & Architecture Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/mongodb/README.md#overview--architecture) for comprehensive cluster setup and configuration guidance.

### Official MongoDB Docker Image

The official MongoDB Docker image is maintained by MongoDB Inc. and provides official MongoDB server images for all supported versions.

**Pull Official Image:**
```bash
# Pull latest MongoDB 7.0
docker pull mongo:7.0

# Pull specific version
docker pull mongo:7.0.5

# List available tags
docker search mongo
```

### Basic Container Run

**Simple Container:**
```bash
docker run --name mongo-container \
    -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=admin \
    -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=securepassword \
    -p 27017:27017 \
    -d mongo:7.0
```

---

## Docker Compose Production Setup

### Basic Production Configuration

**docker-compose.yml:**
```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  mongodb:
    image: mongo:7.0
    container_name: mongodb-production
    restart: unless-stopped
    environment:
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME: ${MONGO_ROOT_USERNAME}
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD: ${MONGO_ROOT_PASSWORD}
    ports:
      - "27017:27017"
    volumes:
      - mongodb_data:/data/db
      - mongodb_config:/data/configdb
    networks:
      - mongodb_network
    command: mongod --wiredTigerCacheSizeGB 2
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "mongosh", "--eval", "db.adminCommand('ping')"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  mongodb_data:
    driver: local
  mongodb_config:
    driver: local

networks:
  mongodb_network:
    driver: bridge
```

---

## Multi-Node Replica Set Setup

### Docker Compose with Replication

**docker-compose.replica.yml:**
```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  mongodb-primary:
    image: mongo:7.0
    container_name: mongodb-primary
    environment:
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME: admin
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD: securepassword
    command: mongod --replSet rs0 --bind_ip_all
    networks:
      - mongodb_network

  mongodb-secondary-1:
    image: mongo:7.0
    container_name: mongodb-secondary-1
    command: mongod --replSet rs0 --bind_ip_all
    networks:
      - mongodb_network

  mongodb-secondary-2:
    image: mongo:7.0
    container_name: mongodb-secondary-2
    command: mongod --replSet rs0 --bind_ip_all
    networks:
      - mongodb_network

networks:
  mongodb_network:
    driver: bridge
```

---

## When to Use Docker for MongoDB

### Choose Docker When:

1. **Consistency:** Need identical environments across dev/staging/prod
2. **Container-First:** Already using containers for other services
3. **Rapid Deployment:** Need quick setup and teardown
4. **Development:** Local development with production parity
5. **CI/CD:** Automated testing and deployment pipelines

### Avoid Docker When:

1. **Maximum Performance:** Need bare metal performance
2. **Simple Setup:** Single server, no containerization needs
3. **Legacy Systems:** Existing infrastructure doesn't support containers
4. **Compliance:** Specific compliance requirements not met by containers

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Orchestration?** → Read [Blog 5: Kubernetes MongoDB](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/mongodb-kubernetes-statefulset-operator-deep-dive)
- **Want Local Development?** → Read [Blog 6: Local Development](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/mongodb-local-development-docker-native-quick-start)
- **Need Performance Tuning?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/mongodb-performance-optimization-query-tuning-indexing)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [MongoDB Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/mongodb/README.md).

---

**Fact-Checking & Verification:** This blog post contains technical specifications, Docker configurations, and best practices based on publicly available documentation and industry research. Docker commands and configurations may vary by version and environment. For the most current and accurate information, please consult:
- [MongoDB Official Documentation](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/)
- [Docker Official Documentation](https://docs.docker.com/)
- [Docker Hub MongoDB Images](https://hub.docker.com/_/mongo)

---

*This is Blog 4 of the MongoDB Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/mongodb-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*
