src/content/markdown/postgresql_7_performance.md, before:

# Blog 7: PostgreSQL Performance Optimization - Query Tuning & Indexing

*Master PostgreSQL performance optimization to reduce costs and improve application responsiveness*

---

## Introduction

PostgreSQL performance optimization is both an art and a science. Understanding query execution, indexing strategies, and configuration tuning can transform a slow database into a high-performance system, reducing infrastructure costs and improving user experience.

This guide covers everything from basic query optimization to advanced indexing techniques, with a focus on helping technical managers understand the business impact of performance optimization and how to prioritize optimization efforts.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to PostgreSQL performance optimization
- **When to use:** When you need to improve database performance or reduce infrastructure costs
- **Reading time:** 12-15 minutes
- **Implementation time:** Ongoing optimization process
- **Key takeaway:** Proper indexing and query optimization can improve performance by 10-100x and reduce infrastructure costs by 30-50%
- **Skip if:** Your database performance is already optimal

**What You'll Master:**
- Query optimization and execution plan analysis
- Indexing strategies and best practices
- Configuration tuning for different workloads
- Connection pooling and resource management
- Monitoring and profiling tools
- Cost optimization through performance improvements

---

## Query Optimization

> 💡 **Want comprehensive query optimization techniques?** Explore our [PostgreSQL SQL Fundamentals Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/relational/postgresql/README.md#sql-fundamentals) for advanced query patterns, subqueries, and window functions.

### EXPLAIN and EXPLAIN ANALYZE

**EXPLAIN Statement:**
```sql
EXPLAIN SELECT * FROM users WHERE email = 'user@example.com';
```

**EXPLAIN ANALYZE (Actual Execution):**
```sql
EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT * FROM users WHERE email = 'user@example.com';
```

**Key Output Columns:**
- `Seq Scan`: Full table scan (usually bad)
- `Index Scan`: Using index (usually good)
- `rows`: Estimated rows examined
- `actual time`: Actual execution time
- `cost`: Query planner cost estimate

### Understanding Query Plans

**Good Execution Plan:**
```
Index Scan using idx_email on users
  Index Cond: (email = 'user@example.com')
  Rows: 1
  Execution Time: 0.1 ms
```

**Bad Execution Plan:**
```
Seq Scan on users
  Filter: (email = 'user@example.com')
  Rows: 1000000
  Execution Time: 500.0 ms
```

### Common Query Issues

**1. Missing Indexes:**
```sql
-- Slow: Full table scan
SELECT * FROM orders WHERE customer_id = 123;

-- Fast: With index
CREATE INDEX idx_orders_customer_id ON orders(customer_id);
SELECT * FROM orders WHERE customer_id = 123;
```

**2. Functions on Indexed Columns:**
```sql
-- Slow: Can't use index
SELECT * FROM users WHERE LOWER(email) = 'user@example.com';

-- Fast: Index-friendly
SELECT * FROM users WHERE email = 'USER@EXAMPLE.COM';
-- Or create expression index
CREATE INDEX idx_users_email_lower ON users(LOWER(email));
```

**3. Unnecessary Data Retrieval:**
```sql
-- Slow: Retrieves all columns
SELECT * FROM users WHERE id = 123;

-- Fast: Only needed columns
SELECT id, name, email FROM users WHERE id = 123;
```

---

## Indexing Strategies

> 💡 **Need detailed indexing guidance?** See our [PostgreSQL Data Management Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/relational/postgresql/README.md#data-management) for comprehensive indexing strategies, composite indexes, and index optimization techniques.

### Index Types

**1. B-tree Index (Default):**
- Most common index type
- Good for equality and range queries
- Automatically used for PRIMARY KEY and UNIQUE constraints

**2. Hash Index:**
- Only for equality comparisons
- Faster than B-tree for equality
- Not used for sorting or range queries

**3. GiST (Generalized Search Tree):**
- For geometric data, full-text search
- Extensible index type

**4. GIN (Generalized Inverted Index):**
- For arrays, full-text search, JSONB
- Efficient for containment queries

**5. BRIN (Block Range Index):**
- For very large tables
- Low maintenance overhead
- Good for naturally sorted data

### Index Best Practices

**1. Index Frequently Queried Columns:**
```sql
-- Index columns in WHERE, JOIN, ORDER BY
CREATE INDEX idx_users_email ON users(email);
CREATE INDEX idx_orders_created_at ON orders(created_at);
```

**2. Composite Index Order Matters:**
```sql
-- Good: Most selective first
CREATE INDEX idx_orders_user_status_date 
ON orders(user_id, status, created_at);

-- Query can use index for:
-- - user_id
-- - user_id, status
-- - user_id, status, created_at
```

**3. Partial Indexes:**
```sql
-- Index only active users
CREATE INDEX idx_users_active_email 
ON users(email) WHERE status = 'active';
```

**4. Expression Indexes:**
```sql
-- Index on expression
CREATE INDEX idx_users_email_lower 
ON users(LOWER(email));
```

### Index Maintenance

**Monitor Index Usage:**
```sql
-- Check index usage
SELECT 
    schemaname,
    tablename,
    indexname,
    idx_scan,
    idx_tup_read,
    idx_tup_fetch
FROM pg_stat_user_indexes
ORDER BY idx_scan;
```

**Remove Unused Indexes:**
- Unused indexes slow down writes
- Monitor and remove indexes not being used
- Consider partial indexes for better selectivity

---

## Configuration Tuning

### Memory Settings

**shared_buffers:**
- 25% of total RAM (up to 8GB for most systems)
- Too high can cause OS cache issues
- Too low reduces cache hit ratio

**effective_cache_size:**
- 50-75% of total RAM
- Helps query planner make better decisions
- Doesn't actually allocate memory

**work_mem:**
- Based on `max_connections` and available RAM
- Formula: `(RAM - shared_buffers) / (max_connections * 2)`
- Too high can cause memory issues
- Too low causes disk sorts

### WAL Settings

**wal_level:**
- `replica`: For replication (default)
- `logical`: For logical replication
- Higher levels increase WAL size

**max_wal_size:**
- Maximum WAL size before checkpoint
- Larger values reduce checkpoint frequency
- Balance between recovery time and performance

---

## Connection Pooling

### Why Connection Pooling?

**Benefits:**
- Reduces connection overhead
- Better resource utilization
- Improves performance for high-concurrency applications
- Reduces memory usage

### PgBouncer

**Configuration:**
```ini
[databases]
mydb = host=postgres-server dbname=mydb

[pgbouncer]
listen_addr = *
listen_port = 6432
auth_type = md5
auth_file = /etc/pgbouncer/userlist.txt
pool_mode = transaction
max_client_conn = 1000
default_pool_size = 25
```

**Pool Modes:**
- `session`: One server connection per client
- `transaction`: One server connection per transaction
- `statement`: One server connection per statement (most aggressive)

---

## Monitoring and Profiling

### pg_stat_statements

**Enable Extension:**
```sql
CREATE EXTENSION pg_stat_statements;
```

**View Top Queries:**
```sql
SELECT 
    query,
    calls,
    total_exec_time,
    mean_exec_time,
    (100 * total_exec_time / SUM(total_exec_time) OVER ()) AS percentage
FROM pg_stat_statements
ORDER BY total_exec_time DESC
LIMIT 10;
```

### Key Metrics to Monitor

**Performance Metrics:**
- Query execution time
- Cache hit ratio
- Index usage
- Connection count
- Replication lag

**Capacity Metrics:**
- Database size
- Table bloat
- Disk space
- Connection pool utilization

---

## Cost Optimization Through Performance

### Performance Impact on Costs

**Example:**
- Slow queries require larger instances
- Optimization can reduce instance size by 30-50%
- Better indexing reduces I/O costs
- Connection pooling reduces memory needs

**ROI Calculation:**
- Optimization effort: 40 hours @ $150/hr = $6,000
- Infrastructure savings: $500/month = $6,000/year
- Payback period: 1 year
- 3-year savings: $12,000 (after payback)

---

## Common Performance Pitfalls

### 1. N+1 Query Problem

**Bad:**
```python
# Multiple queries
for user in users:
    orders = db.query("SELECT * FROM orders WHERE user_id = ?", user.id)
```

**Good:**
```python
# Single query with JOIN
db.query("""
    SELECT u.*, o.* 
    FROM users u 
    LEFT JOIN orders o ON u.id = o.user_id
""")
```

### 2. Missing Indexes

**Impact:**
- Full table scans
- Slow queries
- High I/O costs
- Poor user experience

**Solution:**
- Analyze query patterns
- Add indexes for frequently queried columns
- Monitor index usage

### 3. Over-Indexing

**Impact:**
- Slower writes
- Increased storage
- Maintenance overhead

**Solution:**
- Monitor index usage
- Remove unused indexes
- Use partial indexes

---

## Next Steps

- **Want More Details?** → Explore [PostgreSQL Performance & Operations Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/relational/postgresql/README.md#performance--operations)
- **Need Deployment Help?** → Read [Blog 8: Decision Matrix](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/postgresql-deployment-decision-matrix-complete-comparison-guide)
- **Considering Optimization?** → Review your query patterns and indexing strategy

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [PostgreSQL Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/relational/postgresql/README.md) and [Relational Databases Overview](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/relational/README.md).

---

*This is Blog 7 of the PostgreSQL Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/postgresql-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*

Commit message:

Enhance blog posts with fact-checking and verification sections
- Added fact-checking and verification sections to multiple blog posts across the Aerospike, MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Redis series, ensuring that readers have access to accurate pricing estimates, technical specifications, and best practices.
- Included links to official documentation and resources for each technology to facilitate further research and verification of information.
- Updated pricing disclaimers to reflect approximate costs based on publicly available data as of 2025, emphasizing the importance of verifying current pricing with official sources.

src/content/markdown/postgresql_7_performance.md, after:

# Blog 7: PostgreSQL Performance Optimization - Query Tuning & Indexing

*Master PostgreSQL performance optimization to reduce costs and improve application responsiveness*

---

## Introduction

PostgreSQL performance optimization is both an art and a science. Understanding query execution, indexing strategies, and configuration tuning can transform a slow database into a high-performance system, reducing infrastructure costs and improving user experience.

This guide covers everything from basic query optimization to advanced indexing techniques, with a focus on helping technical managers understand the business impact of performance optimization and how to prioritize optimization efforts.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to PostgreSQL performance optimization
- **When to use:** When you need to improve database performance or reduce infrastructure costs
- **Reading time:** 12-15 minutes
- **Implementation time:** Ongoing optimization process
- **Key takeaway:** Proper indexing and query optimization can improve performance by 10-100x and reduce infrastructure costs by 30-50%
- **Skip if:** Your database performance is already optimal

**What You'll Master:**
- Query optimization and execution plan analysis
- Indexing strategies and best practices
- Configuration tuning for different workloads
- Connection pooling and resource management
- Monitoring and profiling tools
- Cost optimization through performance improvements

---

## Query Optimization

> 💡 **Want comprehensive query optimization techniques?** Explore our [PostgreSQL SQL Fundamentals Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/relational/postgresql/README.md#sql-fundamentals) for advanced query patterns, subqueries, and window functions.

### EXPLAIN and EXPLAIN ANALYZE

**EXPLAIN Statement:**
```sql
EXPLAIN SELECT * FROM users WHERE email = 'user@example.com';
```

**EXPLAIN ANALYZE (Actual Execution):**
```sql
EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT * FROM users WHERE email = 'user@example.com';
```

**Key Output Columns:**
- `Seq Scan`: Full table scan (usually bad)
- `Index Scan`: Using index (usually good)
- `rows`: Estimated rows examined
- `actual time`: Actual execution time
- `cost`: Query planner cost estimate

### Understanding Query Plans

**Good Execution Plan:**
```
Index Scan using idx_email on users
  Index Cond: (email = 'user@example.com')
  Rows: 1
  Execution Time: 0.1 ms
```

**Bad Execution Plan:**
```
Seq Scan on users
  Filter: (email = 'user@example.com')
  Rows: 1000000
  Execution Time: 500.0 ms
```

### Common Query Issues

**1. Missing Indexes:**
```sql
-- Slow: Full table scan
SELECT * FROM orders WHERE customer_id = 123;

-- Fast: With index
CREATE INDEX idx_orders_customer_id ON orders(customer_id);
SELECT * FROM orders WHERE customer_id = 123;
```

**2. Functions on Indexed Columns:**
```sql
-- Slow: Can't use index
SELECT * FROM users WHERE LOWER(email) = 'user@example.com';

-- Fast: Index-friendly
SELECT * FROM users WHERE email = 'USER@EXAMPLE.COM';
-- Or create expression index
CREATE INDEX idx_users_email_lower ON users(LOWER(email));
```

**3. Unnecessary Data Retrieval:**
```sql
-- Slow: Retrieves all columns
SELECT * FROM users WHERE id = 123;

-- Fast: Only needed columns
SELECT id, name, email FROM users WHERE id = 123;
```

---

## Indexing Strategies

> 💡 **Need detailed indexing guidance?** See our [PostgreSQL Data Management Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/relational/postgresql/README.md#data-management) for comprehensive indexing strategies, composite indexes, and index optimization techniques.

### Index Types

**1. B-tree Index (Default):**
- Most common index type
- Good for equality and range queries
- Automatically used for PRIMARY KEY and UNIQUE constraints

**2. Hash Index:**
- Only for equality comparisons
- Faster than B-tree for equality
- Not used for sorting or range queries

**3. GiST (Generalized Search Tree):**
- For geometric data, full-text search
- Extensible index type

**4. GIN (Generalized Inverted Index):**
- For arrays, full-text search, JSONB
- Efficient for containment queries

**5. BRIN (Block Range Index):**
- For very large tables
- Low maintenance overhead
- Good for naturally sorted data

### Index Best Practices

**1. Index Frequently Queried Columns:**
```sql
-- Index columns in WHERE, JOIN, ORDER BY
CREATE INDEX idx_users_email ON users(email);
CREATE INDEX idx_orders_created_at ON orders(created_at);
```

**2. Composite Index Order Matters:**
```sql
-- Good: Most selective first
CREATE INDEX idx_orders_user_status_date 
ON orders(user_id, status, created_at);

-- Query can use index for:
-- - user_id
-- - user_id, status
-- - user_id, status, created_at
```

**3. Partial Indexes:**
```sql
-- Index only active users
CREATE INDEX idx_users_active_email 
ON users(email) WHERE status = 'active';
```

**4. Expression Indexes:**
```sql
-- Index on expression
CREATE INDEX idx_users_email_lower 
ON users(LOWER(email));
```

### Index Maintenance

**Monitor Index Usage:**
```sql
-- Check index usage
SELECT 
    schemaname,
    tablename,
    indexname,
    idx_scan,
    idx_tup_read,
    idx_tup_fetch
FROM pg_stat_user_indexes
ORDER BY idx_scan;
```

**Remove Unused Indexes:**
- Unused indexes slow down writes
- Monitor and remove indexes not being used
- Consider partial indexes for better selectivity

---

## Configuration Tuning

### Memory Settings

**shared_buffers:**
- 25% of total RAM (up to 8GB for most systems)
- Too high can cause OS cache issues
- Too low reduces cache hit ratio

**effective_cache_size:**
- 50-75% of total RAM
- Helps query planner make better decisions
- Doesn't actually allocate memory

**work_mem:**
- Based on `max_connections` and available RAM
- Formula: `(RAM - shared_buffers) / (max_connections * 2)`
- Too high can cause memory issues
- Too low causes disk sorts

### WAL Settings

**wal_level:**
- `replica`: For replication (default)
- `logical`: For logical replication
- Higher levels increase WAL size

**max_wal_size:**
- Maximum WAL size before checkpoint
- Larger values reduce checkpoint frequency
- Balance between recovery time and performance

---

## Connection Pooling

### Why Connection Pooling?

**Benefits:**
- Reduces connection overhead
- Better resource utilization
- Improves performance for high-concurrency applications
- Reduces memory usage

### PgBouncer

**Configuration:**
```ini
[databases]
mydb = host=postgres-server dbname=mydb

[pgbouncer]
listen_addr = *
listen_port = 6432
auth_type = md5
auth_file = /etc/pgbouncer/userlist.txt
pool_mode = transaction
max_client_conn = 1000
default_pool_size = 25
```

**Pool Modes:**
- `session`: One server connection per client
- `transaction`: One server connection per transaction
- `statement`: One server connection per statement (most aggressive)

---

## Monitoring and Profiling

### pg_stat_statements

**Enable Extension:**
```sql
CREATE EXTENSION pg_stat_statements;
```

**View Top Queries:**
```sql
SELECT 
    query,
    calls,
    total_exec_time,
    mean_exec_time,
    (100 * total_exec_time / SUM(total_exec_time) OVER ()) AS percentage
FROM pg_stat_statements
ORDER BY total_exec_time DESC
LIMIT 10;
```

### Key Metrics to Monitor

**Performance Metrics:**
- Query execution time
- Cache hit ratio
- Index usage
- Connection count
- Replication lag

**Capacity Metrics:**
- Database size
- Table bloat
- Disk space
- Connection pool utilization

---

## Cost Optimization Through Performance

### Performance Impact on Costs

**Example:**
- Slow queries require larger instances
- Optimization can reduce instance size by 30-50%
- Better indexing reduces I/O costs
- Connection pooling reduces memory needs

**ROI Calculation:**
- Optimization effort: 40 hours @ $150/hr = $6,000
- Infrastructure savings: $500/month = $6,000/year
- Payback period: 1 year
- 3-year savings: $12,000 (after payback)

---

## Common Performance Pitfalls

### 1. N+1 Query Problem

**Bad:**
```python
# Multiple queries
for user in users:
    orders = db.query("SELECT * FROM orders WHERE user_id = ?", user.id)
```

**Good:**
```python
# Single query with JOIN
db.query("""
    SELECT u.*, o.* 
    FROM users u 
    LEFT JOIN orders o ON u.id = o.user_id
""")
```

### 2. Missing Indexes

**Impact:**
- Full table scans
- Slow queries
- High I/O costs
- Poor user experience

**Solution:**
- Analyze query patterns
- Add indexes for frequently queried columns
- Monitor index usage

### 3. Over-Indexing

**Impact:**
- Slower writes
- Increased storage
- Maintenance overhead

**Solution:**
- Monitor index usage
- Remove unused indexes
- Use partial indexes

---

## Next Steps

- **Want More Details?** → Explore [PostgreSQL Performance & Operations Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/relational/postgresql/README.md#performance--operations)
- **Need Deployment Help?** → Read [Blog 8: Decision Matrix](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/postgresql-deployment-decision-matrix-complete-comparison-guide)
- **Considering Optimization?** → Review your query patterns and indexing strategy

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [PostgreSQL Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/relational/postgresql/README.md) and [Relational Databases Overview](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/relational/README.md).

---

**Fact-Checking & Verification:** This blog post contains performance tuning recommendations, configuration parameters, and optimization strategies based on publicly available documentation and industry research. Performance characteristics and optimal settings may vary significantly by workload, hardware, and PostgreSQL version. For the most current and accurate information, please consult:
- [PostgreSQL Official Documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/)
- [PostgreSQL Performance Tuning Guide](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Performance_Optimization)
- [pg_stat_statements Documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/pgstatstatements.html)

---

*This is Blog 7 of the PostgreSQL Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/postgresql-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*
