src/content/markdown/redis_5_kubernetes.md, before:

# Blog 5: Kubernetes Redis - StatefulSet vs Operator Deep Dive

*Master Kubernetes-native Redis with advanced orchestration patterns for modern infrastructure*

---

## Introduction

Kubernetes has become the de facto standard for container orchestration, and running stateful databases like Redis in Kubernetes requires understanding StatefulSets, persistent volumes, and Redis operators. This guide covers everything from basic StatefulSet deployments to advanced operator-based configurations.

For technical managers, this guide helps you understand when Kubernetes makes sense for Redis, what operational overhead to expect, and how to evaluate different operator options.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to Redis on Kubernetes using StatefulSets and operators
- **When to use:** When you're already using Kubernetes and need cloud-native Redis
- **Reading time:** 12-15 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 4-8 hours for production setup
- **Key takeaway:** StatefulSets provide basic functionality, operators add advanced features like automatic failover and backup—choose based on your team's Kubernetes expertise and requirements
- **Skip if:** You're not using Kubernetes or prefer managed services for simplicity

**What You'll Master:**
- StatefulSet patterns with persistent storage
- Redis Operators (Redis Enterprise, Spotahome)
- Helm chart customization
- Pod disruption budgets and rolling updates
- High availability with Redis Sentinel
- Backup and restore automation

---

## Kubernetes Deployment Strategy Overview

> 💡 **Need Redis architecture details?** Explore our [Redis Overview & Architecture Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md#overview--architecture) for component explanations and configuration options.

### The Three Paths to Kubernetes Redis

| Strategy | Complexity | Control | Maintenance | Best For |
|----------|------------|---------|-------------|----------|
| **StatefulSets** | Low-Medium | High | Medium | Teams wanting full control |
| **Redis Enterprise Operator** | Medium | Medium | Low | Production deployments needing HA |
| **Spotahome Redis Operator** | Medium | Medium | Low | Open-source Redis management |

**Decision Framework:**
- **StatefulSets:** Maximum control, manual HA setup
- **Operators:** Automated HA, backup, and management
- **Choose based on:** Team expertise, HA requirements, operational preferences

---

## Strategy 1: Kubernetes StatefulSets

### Why StatefulSets?

StatefulSets are the Kubernetes workload API object used to manage stateful applications. They provide:
- Stable network identities
- Ordered deployment and scaling
- Stable persistent storage
- Ordered, graceful deployment and scaling

### Basic StatefulSet Configuration

**redis-statefulset.yaml:**
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: StatefulSet
metadata:
  name: redis
spec:
  serviceName: redis
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: redis
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: redis
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: redis
        image: redis:7
        ports:
        - containerPort: 6379
          name: redis
        volumeMounts:
        - name: redis-data
          mountPath: /data
  volumeClaimTemplates:
  - metadata:
      name: redis-data
    spec:
      accessModes: [ "ReadWriteOnce" ]
      storageClassName: fast-ssd
      resources:
        requests:
          storage: 50Gi
```

---

## When to Choose Kubernetes for Redis

**Best For:**
- Already using Kubernetes for other services
- Need cloud-native deployment patterns
- Want infrastructure as code
- Have Kubernetes expertise

**Considerations:**
- Medium-High operational overhead
- Requires Kubernetes and Redis expertise
- Operators reduce some operational burden

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Performance Tuning?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-performance-optimization-memory-management)
- **Want Local Development?** → Read [Blog 6: Local Development](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-local-development-docker-native-quick-start)
- **Still Deciding?** → Read [Blog 8: Decision Matrix](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-deployment-decision-matrix-complete-comparison-guide)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [Redis Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md).

---

*This is Blog 5 of the Redis Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*

Commit message:

Enhance blog posts with fact-checking and verification sections
- Added fact-checking and verification sections to multiple blog posts across the Aerospike, MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Redis series, ensuring that readers have access to accurate pricing estimates, technical specifications, and best practices.
- Included links to official documentation and resources for each technology to facilitate further research and verification of information.
- Updated pricing disclaimers to reflect approximate costs based on publicly available data as of 2025, emphasizing the importance of verifying current pricing with official sources.

src/content/markdown/redis_5_kubernetes.md, after:

# Blog 5: Kubernetes Redis - StatefulSet vs Operator Deep Dive

*Master Kubernetes-native Redis with advanced orchestration patterns for modern infrastructure*

---

## Introduction

Kubernetes has become the de facto standard for container orchestration, and running stateful databases like Redis in Kubernetes requires understanding StatefulSets, persistent volumes, and Redis operators. This guide covers everything from basic StatefulSet deployments to advanced operator-based configurations.

For technical managers, this guide helps you understand when Kubernetes makes sense for Redis, what operational overhead to expect, and how to evaluate different operator options.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to Redis on Kubernetes using StatefulSets and operators
- **When to use:** When you're already using Kubernetes and need cloud-native Redis
- **Reading time:** 12-15 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 4-8 hours for production setup
- **Key takeaway:** StatefulSets provide basic functionality, operators add advanced features like automatic failover and backup—choose based on your team's Kubernetes expertise and requirements
- **Skip if:** You're not using Kubernetes or prefer managed services for simplicity

**What You'll Master:**
- StatefulSet patterns with persistent storage
- Redis Operators (Redis Enterprise, Spotahome)
- Helm chart customization
- Pod disruption budgets and rolling updates
- High availability with Redis Sentinel
- Backup and restore automation

---

## Kubernetes Deployment Strategy Overview

> 💡 **Need Redis architecture details?** Explore our [Redis Overview & Architecture Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md#overview--architecture) for component explanations and configuration options.

### The Three Paths to Kubernetes Redis

| Strategy | Complexity | Control | Maintenance | Best For |
|----------|------------|---------|-------------|----------|
| **StatefulSets** | Low-Medium | High | Medium | Teams wanting full control |
| **Redis Enterprise Operator** | Medium | Medium | Low | Production deployments needing HA |
| **Spotahome Redis Operator** | Medium | Medium | Low | Open-source Redis management |

**Decision Framework:**
- **StatefulSets:** Maximum control, manual HA setup
- **Operators:** Automated HA, backup, and management
- **Choose based on:** Team expertise, HA requirements, operational preferences

---

## Strategy 1: Kubernetes StatefulSets

### Why StatefulSets?

StatefulSets are the Kubernetes workload API object used to manage stateful applications. They provide:
- Stable network identities
- Ordered deployment and scaling
- Stable persistent storage
- Ordered, graceful deployment and scaling

### Basic StatefulSet Configuration

**redis-statefulset.yaml:**
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: StatefulSet
metadata:
  name: redis
spec:
  serviceName: redis
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: redis
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: redis
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: redis
        image: redis:7
        ports:
        - containerPort: 6379
          name: redis
        volumeMounts:
        - name: redis-data
          mountPath: /data
  volumeClaimTemplates:
  - metadata:
      name: redis-data
    spec:
      accessModes: [ "ReadWriteOnce" ]
      storageClassName: fast-ssd
      resources:
        requests:
          storage: 50Gi
```

---

## When to Choose Kubernetes for Redis

**Best For:**
- Already using Kubernetes for other services
- Need cloud-native deployment patterns
- Want infrastructure as code
- Have Kubernetes expertise

**Considerations:**
- Medium-High operational overhead
- Requires Kubernetes and Redis expertise
- Operators reduce some operational burden

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Performance Tuning?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-performance-optimization-memory-management)
- **Want Local Development?** → Read [Blog 6: Local Development](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-local-development-docker-native-quick-start)
- **Still Deciding?** → Read [Blog 8: Decision Matrix](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-deployment-decision-matrix-complete-comparison-guide)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [Redis Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md).

---

**Fact-Checking & Verification:** This blog post contains Kubernetes configurations, operator information, and best practices based on publicly available documentation and industry research. Kubernetes manifests and operator capabilities may vary by version and provider. For the most current and accurate information, please consult:
- [Redis Official Documentation](https://redis.io/docs/)
- [Kubernetes Official Documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/)
- [Redis Operator Documentation](https://github.com/spotahome/redis-operator)

---

*This is Blog 5 of the Redis Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*
