src/content/markdown/redis_4_docker.md, before:

# Blog 4: Docker Redis - Container Deployment Strategies

*Deploy production-ready Redis using Docker with focus on consistency and operational simplicity*

---

## Introduction

Docker has revolutionized database deployment, providing consistency across environments and simplifying operations. However, running Redis in containers for production requires careful consideration of data persistence, networking, security, and resource management.

This comprehensive guide covers production-ready Redis containerization strategies, from basic Docker Compose setups to advanced multi-node configurations. You'll learn how to evaluate Docker for Redis, deploy securely, and operate containerized databases that meet production requirements.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to Redis containerization with Docker
- **When to use:** When you want consistent deployments across environments or container-first infrastructure
- **Reading time:** 10-12 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 2-4 hours for production setup
- **Key takeaway:** Docker simplifies deployment but requires careful attention to data persistence, networking, and security
- **Skip if:** You prefer native installations or managed services

**What You'll Master:**
- Docker Compose production configurations with security
- Container resource management and performance optimization
- Persistent volume strategies and backup automation
- Multi-node cluster setup with Docker
- Security best practices for containerized databases

---

## Docker Basics for Redis

> 💡 **Learning Redis basics?** Check out our [Redis Overview & Architecture Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md#overview--architecture) for comprehensive cluster setup and configuration guidance.

### Official Redis Docker Image

The official Redis Docker image is maintained by the Redis community and provides official Redis server images for all supported versions.

**Pull Official Image:**
```bash
# Pull latest Redis 7
docker pull redis:7

# Pull specific version
docker pull redis:7.2
```

### Basic Container Run

**Simple Container:**
```bash
docker run --name redis-container \
    -p 6379:6379 \
    -d redis:7
```

---

## Docker Compose Production Setup

### Basic Production Configuration

**docker-compose.yml:**
```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  redis:
    image: redis:7
    container_name: redis-production
    restart: unless-stopped
    ports:
      - "6379:6379"
    volumes:
      - redis_data:/data
    command: redis-server --appendonly yes --maxmemory 2gb --maxmemory-policy allkeys-lru
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "redis-cli", "ping"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  redis_data:
    driver: local

networks:
  redis_network:
    driver: bridge
```

---

## When to Use Docker for Redis

### Choose Docker When:

1. **Consistency:** Need identical environments across dev/staging/prod
2. **Container-First:** Already using containers for other services
3. **Rapid Deployment:** Need quick setup and teardown
4. **Development:** Local development with production parity
5. **CI/CD:** Automated testing and deployment pipelines

### Avoid Docker When:

1. **Maximum Performance:** Need bare metal performance
2. **Simple Setup:** Single server, no containerization needs
3. **Legacy Systems:** Existing infrastructure doesn't support containers

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Orchestration?** → Read [Blog 5: Kubernetes Redis](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-kubernetes-statefulset-operator-deep-dive)
- **Want Local Development?** → Read [Blog 6: Local Development](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-local-development-docker-native-quick-start)
- **Need Performance Tuning?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-performance-optimization-memory-management)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [Redis Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md).

---

*This is Blog 4 of the Redis Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*

Commit message:

Enhance blog posts with fact-checking and verification sections
- Added fact-checking and verification sections to multiple blog posts across the Aerospike, MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Redis series, ensuring that readers have access to accurate pricing estimates, technical specifications, and best practices.
- Included links to official documentation and resources for each technology to facilitate further research and verification of information.
- Updated pricing disclaimers to reflect approximate costs based on publicly available data as of 2025, emphasizing the importance of verifying current pricing with official sources.

src/content/markdown/redis_4_docker.md, after:

# Blog 4: Docker Redis - Container Deployment Strategies

*Deploy production-ready Redis using Docker with focus on consistency and operational simplicity*

---

## Introduction

Docker has revolutionized database deployment, providing consistency across environments and simplifying operations. However, running Redis in containers for production requires careful consideration of data persistence, networking, security, and resource management.

This comprehensive guide covers production-ready Redis containerization strategies, from basic Docker Compose setups to advanced multi-node configurations. You'll learn how to evaluate Docker for Redis, deploy securely, and operate containerized databases that meet production requirements.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to Redis containerization with Docker
- **When to use:** When you want consistent deployments across environments or container-first infrastructure
- **Reading time:** 10-12 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 2-4 hours for production setup
- **Key takeaway:** Docker simplifies deployment but requires careful attention to data persistence, networking, and security
- **Skip if:** You prefer native installations or managed services

**What You'll Master:**
- Docker Compose production configurations with security
- Container resource management and performance optimization
- Persistent volume strategies and backup automation
- Multi-node cluster setup with Docker
- Security best practices for containerized databases

---

## Docker Basics for Redis

> 💡 **Learning Redis basics?** Check out our [Redis Overview & Architecture Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md#overview--architecture) for comprehensive cluster setup and configuration guidance.

### Official Redis Docker Image

The official Redis Docker image is maintained by the Redis community and provides official Redis server images for all supported versions.

**Pull Official Image:**
```bash
# Pull latest Redis 7
docker pull redis:7

# Pull specific version
docker pull redis:7.2
```

### Basic Container Run

**Simple Container:**
```bash
docker run --name redis-container \
    -p 6379:6379 \
    -d redis:7
```

---

## Docker Compose Production Setup

### Basic Production Configuration

**docker-compose.yml:**
```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  redis:
    image: redis:7
    container_name: redis-production
    restart: unless-stopped
    ports:
      - "6379:6379"
    volumes:
      - redis_data:/data
    command: redis-server --appendonly yes --maxmemory 2gb --maxmemory-policy allkeys-lru
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "redis-cli", "ping"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  redis_data:
    driver: local

networks:
  redis_network:
    driver: bridge
```

---

## When to Use Docker for Redis

### Choose Docker When:

1. **Consistency:** Need identical environments across dev/staging/prod
2. **Container-First:** Already using containers for other services
3. **Rapid Deployment:** Need quick setup and teardown
4. **Development:** Local development with production parity
5. **CI/CD:** Automated testing and deployment pipelines

### Avoid Docker When:

1. **Maximum Performance:** Need bare metal performance
2. **Simple Setup:** Single server, no containerization needs
3. **Legacy Systems:** Existing infrastructure doesn't support containers

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Orchestration?** → Read [Blog 5: Kubernetes Redis](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-kubernetes-statefulset-operator-deep-dive)
- **Want Local Development?** → Read [Blog 6: Local Development](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-local-development-docker-native-quick-start)
- **Need Performance Tuning?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-performance-optimization-memory-management)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [Redis Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md).

---

**Fact-Checking & Verification:** This blog post contains technical specifications, Docker configurations, and best practices based on publicly available documentation and industry research. Docker commands and configurations may vary by version and environment. For the most current and accurate information, please consult:
- [Redis Official Documentation](https://redis.io/docs/)
- [Docker Official Documentation](https://docs.docker.com/)
- [Docker Hub Redis Images](https://hub.docker.com/_/redis)

---

*This is Blog 4 of the Redis Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*
