src/content/markdown/redis_6_local_dev.md, before:

# Blog 6: Redis Local Development - Docker vs Native Quick Start

*Optimize your development environment for maximum productivity and seamless production parity*

---

## Introduction

Setting up Redis for local development shouldn't be complicated, but choosing between Docker and native installation can impact your productivity. This guide covers both approaches, helping you choose the right method for your workflow and optimize your development environment.

For technical managers, this guide helps you understand the trade-offs between Docker and native installations, and how to ensure development environments match production for better quality and faster delivery.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to Redis local development setup
- **When to use:** When setting up Redis for development or testing
- **Reading time:** 8-10 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 15-30 minutes for setup
- **Key takeaway:** Docker provides consistency, native installation offers better performance—choose based on your team's workflow and needs
- **Skip if:** You're only deploying to production and don't need local development

**What You'll Master:**
- Docker development setup with hot-reloading
- Native installation performance comparison
- IDE integration and debugging configurations
- Local cluster setup for multi-node testing
- Development-to-production parity strategies

---

## Docker Development Setup

> 💡 **Learning Redis basics?** Check out our [Redis Data Structures Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md#data-structures) for comprehensive data structure operations and use cases.

### Quick Start with Docker

The official Redis Docker image is the easiest way to get started:

**Basic Setup:**
```bash
docker run --name redis-dev \
    -p 6379:6379 \
    -d redis:7
```

**Connect:**
```bash
redis-cli
```

### Docker Compose for Development

**docker-compose.dev.yml:**
```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  redis:
    image: redis:7
    container_name: redis-dev
    ports:
      - "6379:6379"
    volumes:
      - redis_dev_data:/data
    command: redis-server --appendonly yes
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "redis-cli", "ping"]
      interval: 5s
      timeout: 3s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  redis_dev_data:
```

---

## Native Installation

### Installation Methods

**macOS (Homebrew):**
```bash
brew install redis
brew services start redis
```

**Ubuntu/Debian:**
```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install redis-server
sudo systemctl start redis
```

**Windows:**
- Download installer from redis.io
- Run installer with default options
- Redis service starts automatically

---

## When to Choose Each Approach

### Choose Docker When:

1. **Team Consistency:** Need identical environments across team
2. **CI/CD Integration:** Automated testing in containers
3. **Multi-Service Development:** Running multiple services together
4. **Platform Independence:** Windows, macOS, Linux compatibility
5. **Production Parity:** Production uses containers

### Choose Native When:

1. **Performance Testing:** Need maximum performance
2. **Deep Debugging:** Require direct filesystem access
3. **Custom Configuration:** Need system-level tuning
4. **Resource Constraints:** Limited Docker resources
5. **Production Uses Native:** Production is native installation

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Production Setup?** → Read [Blog 3: Self-Managed](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-self-managed-vm-bare-metal-production-guide) or [Blog 2: Cloud-Managed](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-cloud-managed-elasticache-memorystore-deep-dive)
- **Want Performance Optimization?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-performance-optimization-memory-management)
- **Considering Kubernetes?** → Read [Blog 5: Kubernetes Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-kubernetes-statefulset-operator-deep-dive)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [Redis Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md).

---

*This is Blog 6 of the Redis Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*

Commit message:

Enhance blog posts with fact-checking and verification sections
- Added fact-checking and verification sections to multiple blog posts across the Aerospike, MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Redis series, ensuring that readers have access to accurate pricing estimates, technical specifications, and best practices.
- Included links to official documentation and resources for each technology to facilitate further research and verification of information.
- Updated pricing disclaimers to reflect approximate costs based on publicly available data as of 2025, emphasizing the importance of verifying current pricing with official sources.

src/content/markdown/redis_6_local_dev.md, after:

# Blog 6: Redis Local Development - Docker vs Native Quick Start

*Optimize your development environment for maximum productivity and seamless production parity*

---

## Introduction

Setting up Redis for local development shouldn't be complicated, but choosing between Docker and native installation can impact your productivity. This guide covers both approaches, helping you choose the right method for your workflow and optimize your development environment.

For technical managers, this guide helps you understand the trade-offs between Docker and native installations, and how to ensure development environments match production for better quality and faster delivery.

## TL;DR

- **What:** Complete guide to Redis local development setup
- **When to use:** When setting up Redis for development or testing
- **Reading time:** 8-10 minutes
- **Implementation time:** 15-30 minutes for setup
- **Key takeaway:** Docker provides consistency, native installation offers better performance—choose based on your team's workflow and needs
- **Skip if:** You're only deploying to production and don't need local development

**What You'll Master:**
- Docker development setup with hot-reloading
- Native installation performance comparison
- IDE integration and debugging configurations
- Local cluster setup for multi-node testing
- Development-to-production parity strategies

---

## Docker Development Setup

> 💡 **Learning Redis basics?** Check out our [Redis Data Structures Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md#data-structures) for comprehensive data structure operations and use cases.

### Quick Start with Docker

The official Redis Docker image is the easiest way to get started:

**Basic Setup:**
```bash
docker run --name redis-dev \
    -p 6379:6379 \
    -d redis:7
```

**Connect:**
```bash
redis-cli
```

### Docker Compose for Development

**docker-compose.dev.yml:**
```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  redis:
    image: redis:7
    container_name: redis-dev
    ports:
      - "6379:6379"
    volumes:
      - redis_dev_data:/data
    command: redis-server --appendonly yes
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "redis-cli", "ping"]
      interval: 5s
      timeout: 3s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  redis_dev_data:
```

---

## Native Installation

### Installation Methods

**macOS (Homebrew):**
```bash
brew install redis
brew services start redis
```

**Ubuntu/Debian:**
```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install redis-server
sudo systemctl start redis
```

**Windows:**
- Download installer from redis.io
- Run installer with default options
- Redis service starts automatically

---

## When to Choose Each Approach

### Choose Docker When:

1. **Team Consistency:** Need identical environments across team
2. **CI/CD Integration:** Automated testing in containers
3. **Multi-Service Development:** Running multiple services together
4. **Platform Independence:** Windows, macOS, Linux compatibility
5. **Production Parity:** Production uses containers

### Choose Native When:

1. **Performance Testing:** Need maximum performance
2. **Deep Debugging:** Require direct filesystem access
3. **Custom Configuration:** Need system-level tuning
4. **Resource Constraints:** Limited Docker resources
5. **Production Uses Native:** Production is native installation

---

## Next Steps

- **Need Production Setup?** → Read [Blog 3: Self-Managed](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-self-managed-vm-bare-metal-production-guide) or [Blog 2: Cloud-Managed](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-cloud-managed-elasticache-memorystore-deep-dive)
- **Want Performance Optimization?** → Read [Blog 7: Performance Optimization](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-performance-optimization-memory-management)
- **Considering Kubernetes?** → Read [Blog 5: Kubernetes Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-kubernetes-statefulset-operator-deep-dive)

## Deep Dive Resources

For comprehensive technical details, explore our [Redis Technical Deep Dive](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/dochub/#/databases/nosql/redis/README.md).

---

**Fact-Checking & Verification:** This blog post contains setup instructions, configuration examples, and best practices based on publicly available documentation and industry research. Installation steps and commands may vary by operating system and Redis version. For the most current and accurate information, please consult:
- [Redis Official Documentation](https://redis.io/docs/)
- [Redis Download Page](https://redis.io/download/)
- [Docker Official Documentation](https://docs.docker.com/)

---

*This is Blog 6 of the Redis Mastery Series. Return to the [series hub](https://thisiskushal31.github.io/blog/#/blog/redis-mastery-series) to explore all posts.*
